---
title: Spine types understood by VHV
lang: en es
ref: data types
author: Craig Stuart Sapp
translator: 
creation_date: 2 Sep 2019
translation_date: 
last_updated: 2 Sep 2019
tags: [all]
sidebar: main_sidebar
keywords: data types
vim: ts=3 ft=javascript
summary: "Data types understood by Verovio Humdrum Viewer."
permalink: /spine/index.html
---

This section of the VHV documentation describes data types that are
known to VHV and used to convert Humdrum data into music notation.

Data types, or <i>exclusive interpretations</i> in Humdrum terminology,
are listed at the start of a data spine and preceded by two asterisks
(`**`).  Data of that type can then be given in the spine assigned
to that data type and the spine terminator (`*-`) ends the spine
started with the initial exclusive interpretation.

Here are a list of the exclusive interpretations that are processed
by Verovio Humdrum Viewer when converting Humdrum data into music notation:

<style>
table.exinterp td {
	text-align: top;
}
</style>

Musical spine types:

These data types are covered in the [Music encoding](/humdrum/getting_started) section
of the documentation.

<table class="exinterp">

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt>**dynam</tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		This is data type describes dynamics associated with one or more <tt>**kern</tt>
		spine found to the left of this sort of spine.
	</td>
</tr>

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt>**kern</tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		This is the "core" music representation data type, describing in particular
		pitches and durations for notes, as well as other musical elements such as
		ties, slurs and articulations.
	</td>
</tr>

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt>**text</tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		This is data type describes lyric text to display with the music.  Each separate
		spine of text data will be assigned to a different verse in the notation display.
	</td>
</tr>

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt>**fb</tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		This is data type describes figured base to display with the kern spine on the
		left side of the spine (or if the <tt>**fb</tt> spine has no kern spine after it,
		the figure-bass symbols are displayed underneath the system rather than associated
		with a specific part.
	</td>
</tr>

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt>**recip</tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		This data type functions similarly to a `**kern` spine when parsing the
		rhythm of Humdrum data, but the spine does not generate a musical staff
		when the score is rendered to graphical notation.
	</td>
</tr>

</table>

Graphical data types:

These data types are used to display other types of exclusive
information data as chord or lyric text data in the music notation.
Any data type can be displayed as if it were text in the music
notation, either treated as lyrics (verses) or as chords.  The
easiest way to display such data would be to change the data type
for the spine to one of the following types, or postfix the original
data type onto one of the following meta data type names so that
the Humdrum data type is embedded as a class label in the resulting
SVG image.


<table class="exinterp">

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt><a href="/spine/vdata">**vdata</a></tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		This data type is displayed like lyric text.  The main difference
		is that spaces in <tt>**text</tt> data will generate elision markers,
		while spaces in <tt>**vdata</tt> spines will be preserved as spaces.  
		Like <tt>**text</tt> data, <tt>**vdata</tt> data must be coincident
		with notes on the associated staff due to limitations placed on lyric
		text by the MEI format used to create the graphical notation in VHV.
		Also, <tt>**vdata</tt> cannot be attached to rests.
	</td>
</tr>

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt><a href="/spine/cdata">**cdata</a></tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		The <tt>**cdata</tt> data type is similar to <tt>**vdata</tt>, but it
		is display above staves by default, and does not have to be associated with
		a note on the paired staff. 
	</td>
</tr>

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt><a href="/spine/vvdata">**vvdata</a></tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		The <tt>**vvdata</tt> data type is related to <tt>**vdata</tt>, but instead of
		generating each "verse" with a separate spine, the verses are generated by
		spaces within the vvdata data.
	</td>
</tr>

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt><a href="/spine/ccdata">**ccdata</a></tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		Probably does not exist yet, but will be similar to <tt>vvdata</tt> as a 
		companion for the <tt>**cdata</tt> data type.
	</td>
</tr>

<tr>
	<td>
		<tt><a href="/spine/color">**color</a></tt>
	</td>
	<td>
		Used to color notes by staff or system.
	</td>
</tr>


</table>





